---
layout: splash
author_profile: true
---

# Work-in-Progress
In an effort to get myself out of my comfort zone I have decided to start this page as a place to collect my thoughts, observations, great blog posts and other items related to Project Management. 

## A_little_about_me:

I am a Certified Paralegal and Project Manager for my companies Global HR Compliance department. My role in this department is very fluid related to the needs of the department. Some days I am putting on my executive assistant hat for the GVP, other days Project managing one of the 4-5 projects under my purview and other days I am preparing, organizing and maintaining data related to major litigation cases. I am a team player - so being flexible is something that comes naturally to me. In my prior role, I went from being an entry-level paralegal to Operations Manager in 2 years. This is largely due to my team mentality: I started putting together reference guides to make sense of the rules and requirements of the legal foreclosure world in our state. At that time, a lot of people I worked with were concerned about documenting their procedures because they approached it as a way of maintaining job security. From my perspective, there is more security when things are being done right in a department and not just at an individual level. A department is only as good as it's weakest link. That ended up with me being promoted to a team leader, then manager and then eventually a Operations Manger reporting to the COO of the company and having up to 44 direct reports. 

Thanks for stopping by!

