---
layout: splash
author_profile: true
---

# West Wing: Reflections on the best televised Two-Term Presidency
In honor of being a few days away from the closure of the most contentious election in recent memory, I decided to rewatch "The West Wing" over the past three weeks. Being a person who fervently studied political science in college and contemplated a career in that area - I actually do not like to watch many political dramas. Similar to my taste in sci-fi, I only like political drama's that are hopeful. I am very aware of the corrupt underbelly that exists in politics, I don't need it shoved in my face (aka House of Cards or Scandal). I prefer shows that can depict a realistic portrayal of government and specifically, show how we can make the best of it. How we can face the snarling, belligerent beast that exists in DC - and makes it submit to progressive ideals that benefit and protect the citizens of this country.

I decided to rewatch the series because I am sick, tired and disparaged of the 24/7 news cycle of this so-called presidential election. Regardless of your feelings on these candidates, as a country - we deserve and should expect better. From our candidates, from our primaries, from our debates, from our media - all of it. On both sides of the isle.

If you have never watched the show, watch season 7. If you can't watch the whole thing, watch episode 7 of season 7. That debate is what we should expect of all Presidential debates as far as substance and passion. Something we definitely did not have during this year's Presidential debates. 

While binging the series, I couldn't help but put my Project Manager/HR/company culture hat on and analyze the decisions made on the show as they pertain to people management, in general, the ever elusive work-life balance, and approaches to stress in the workplace while staying respectful.

## Ways and Means
The one thing that you initially come away with when you watch this show is the immense sense of importance that every person sitting in that White House feel everyday. Only 10% (give or take) of the world's population feel that their work brings them purpose. The people in this show are that 10%; which is what makes them so compelling. When you look at the staff of a White House in the way it is shown on this show, you realize that the team that ends up in the White House advising the President are basically the President's war buddies. They are the people - who with their talents combined - made a dream a reality. They were in the trenches for a year plus, working for a person they truly and unabashedly believe in (or at least, hopefully, that's why they did it). They took major risks to their lives, their careers, their health....all for one unified mission: get their candidate elected. It's all strategy, it's all forethought, it's all discussion and devil's advocacy. And once they do it - once they get their candidate elected - that wiring they have honed for the past year will prove essential to get them thru their everyday workload in the White House. 

I definitely understand that a lot of those "team-building seminars" that are held where people climb up telephone poles or do trust-falls come from trying to artificially/forcefully create this type of comradery. But I fear nothing will ever measure up unless there are some real consequences at stake that could bring people together. 

I would say the original group involved in a start-up probably also experiences a similar effect. I think there is something in that - that we as HR folks could garner. Maybe it would be best to try to hire people in groups of two. If not in the same sections, at least in the same departments. To help new hires have someone right from the beginning to go thru that experience with. Maybe also we try to create more opportunities to get departments to work together as a unit on projects for their sector. Perhaps have them put together presentations about items they are working on every quarter. I just find that without this kind of bonding situation on a team, you end up with issues such as retention, departmental loyalty, siloing, etc. Putting a little more effort up front could save a lot of headaches down the road.


## The Pursuit of Happiness
 Another theme that is pretty significant in this show is the "cost" of having a job that brings such immense purpose. You definitely get the feeling that a tradeoff is required for performing any of the roles depicted on the show, not just the role of President. That tradeoff is a sacrifice in one's personal agenda/life. It is of note that the majority of the staff do not have children (other than the President and Leo McGarry) and they often have troubles in their relationships related to their careers and ambitions. 
 
I would think that nowadays due to the increased ability to be connected while physically anywhere in the world - the work-life balance issue may be workable. Maybe not 90%, but at least 20%. As with every organization, work-life balance may be difficult to attain but if you encourage it and make it part of your company culture - you can make it happen. Regardless of the workload expectations. As long as you have responsible employees; they can get this done. This is why so many organizations are switching to unlimited PTO - because they know their employees will be responsible and won't abuse it.
 
Yet another benefit of being in such a purpose-driven position is the autonomy. Oftentimes in the show, the President, and others, hand over full autonomy to problem solve to a counterpart or they get the opportunity to problem solve in a group of their peers. Problem solving is something we have been programmed to love. It's what we do best. The spark of creativity that is released when one is free to problem solve an issue that has huge implications and that if doing them correctly could positively impact people's lives - has got to be an amazing rush. 

Most jobs do not give people an opportunity to employees to make decisions that can affect a whole country - but often there are decisions made that do have an impact on their immediate co-workers and peers. I think in order to create the sense of purpose and autonomy- reflected in the show - is taking thoughtful steps toward and encouragement of getting our employees  in a room with their peers and a problem and just let them work it out. I think creating this as a regularly scheduled event that brings in people from various areas of the organization (for larger orgs) would be immensely helpful.It allows them to get creative, it creates that much-needed comradery, and if they come up with a solution together it will only reinforce the importance of taking the time to put together these meetings. I know a lot of organizations are now putting together "councils" to allow a similar idea of bringing people together but often in these councils, it is still only people from a certain subset of the organization. If your organization is going the "council" route - I would encourage posting the purpose of the council and having employees "apply" to positions on the council; their application can be vetted or chosen at random (the fact that they even have an interest should be encouraged). The council's roster should be limited (maybe 2 quarters or a full year) to allow for fresh ideas to come in periodically.

## Requiem
Although we often see depicted on high-pressure careers whose decisions can often be life or death for others. Whether it's a political show or a medical show or a policy/firefighter drama. We like to depict these jobs because we generally feel that those jobs have to be the most dramatic due to the stakes. I would agree that they are dramatic and the stakes are high - but I would argue that the autonomy, purpose, collaboration and pressurized problem-solving happen in many careers, every day, around the world. Their stakes may not be life or death, but there are always repercussions. As HR, we need to try to identify the opportunities in an organization to reinforce a positive company culture and give people a sense of purpose in their jobs. There is always a purpose to be found; sometimes you just have to dig a little deeper to identify it. 

I once worked at a foreclosure law firm in the state of Florida during the highest peak of foreclosures in the state post-2008. I was an operations manager and at any given time had 40 reports under me. As you can imagine, many employees didn't consider that a dream job. To make a long story short and after having conversations with several managers in the organization, I identified their purpose: they were the protectors of the continued existence of the 30-year mortgage. By them ensuring they were doing their work diligently, filing their complaints and affidavits, they were reaffirming the rule of law when it comes to mortgages. By doing so, they allowed these kinds of mortgages to continue being able to exist in the world. If people defaulted on 30-year mortgages and the rule of law was not followed to address the failure of a part to keep up their part of a contract, the contract would become weak and unenforceable over time. Granted, there were people's lives involved and a lot of outside factors in why people were unable to pay their mortgages. We also were part of the group that would schedule mediations with the borrowers before we filed suit to try to work out a payment plan. 

I guess my point is, just because we don't all do jobs that impact national policy - doesn't mean we can't inject some of the feelings of these positions into any organization. It just takes some time and some dedication - but the payoff could be identifying that ever elusive Millennial labor force and what you have to do to keep them in your organization.










